Nice — a photography page is a great addition, and it also gives you a reason to flex the design-system muscle you've been building with paras/ui. Here's an architecture that stays fully free/open-source and fits cleanly into what you already have (Next.js 16, deployed on Netlify with your existing metadata/SEO setup).

The stack, in one line

Cloudflare R2 (storage) → Next.js <Image> rendered through Netlify's Image CDN (optimization, already free and automatic on your setup) → react-photo-album + yet-another-react-lightbox (gallery UI) → Next.js Metadata API + JSON-LD + image sitemap (SEO).

You don't need a paid image service at all — here's why, piece by piece.

1. Where to store the actual photos

Don't put full-res exports in /public in your git repo — it bloats the repo and slows every clone/build as your collection grows. Use object storage instead, and keep the repo holding only a small metadata file that points to it.

Recommended: Cloudflare R2

10GB storage free, and — the big one — zero egress fees, so serving traffic never costs you anything as the gallery gets more visitors
S3-compatible API, and it gives you a free public bucket URL (pub-xxxx.r2.dev) with one click — no custom domain needed since you're on a netlify.app subdomain
You upload once via the dashboard or a small script, and reference the URLs from your metadata file

Simpler alternative: Cloudinary free tier (25 credits/month, where 1 credit = 1GB storage/bandwidth or 1,000 transformations) — easier dashboard and upload widget, but on a personal-scale free tier your storage+bandwidth+transformations all draw from the same 25-credit pool, so it's easier to outgrow than R2's essentially-free-forever setup. Fine to start with if you want less setup friction.

Either way: before uploading, resize originals down to a sane max (e.g. 2500px on the long edge, ~85% JPEG quality) with sharp. Nobody needs your camera's full 24MP in a browser, and it cuts storage + transfer for free.

2. Optimization — you may already have this half-solved

Since you deploy to Netlify, next/image is automatically wired to Netlify's Image CDN — it does on-demand resizing, AVIF/WebP format conversion, and responsive srcset generation for you, whether the source is local or remote. So you likely don't need Cloudinary's transformation features at all — just point next.config.js's images.remotePatterns at your R2 bucket domain and use next/image as normal.

To get the most out of it:

Set images: { formats: ['image/avif', 'image/webp'] } in next.config.js
Give every image a proper sizes prop matching your grid's actual rendered width at each breakpoint — this is what stops the CDN from sending an oversized image to a phone
Generate a blur placeholder (blurDataURL) per photo at ingest time using plaiceholder (open-source), and store it in metadata so the placeholder ships instantly with zero extra requests
3. Metadata layer — no CMS needed

For a personal gallery, a single version-controlled photos.json (or a typed .ts file) is genuinely better than a headless CMS — free, simple, and fits how you already work:

ts
{
  slug: "himalayan-sunrise-uttarakhand",
  src: "https://pub-xxxx.r2.dev/himalayan-sunrise.jpg",
  width: 2500, height: 1667,
  alt: "Sunrise over the Himalayan range, Uttarakhand",
  caption: "Shot at 6am near Chopta",
  takenAt: "2026-03-14",
  camera: { make: "...", lens: "...", aperture: "f/8", shutter: "1/250", iso: 100 },
  blurDataURL: "data:image/..."
}

Extract the camera/lens/aperture fields automatically with exifr (open-source) when you add a new photo, rather than typing them by hand.

Nice-to-have: write a small Node ingest script — drop new exports in a folder, it resizes with sharp, extracts EXIF with exifr, generates a blur hash with plaiceholder, uploads to R2, and appends the entry to photos.json. Turns "add a photo" into one command.

4. Gallery UI + lazy loading
react-photo-album — actively maintained, built specifically for this, has an official Next.js <Image> integration example, supports rows/columns/masonry layouts, and produces correct SSR markup with srcset out of the box
Pair it with yet-another-react-lightbox (same author) for the click-to-expand full view — zoom, keyboard nav, thumbnails, all free
next/image lazy-loads below-the-fold images by default via native lazy loading — you don't need to do anything extra there. Just make sure the first visible photo (likely your grid's opener) gets priority so it's not lazy-loaded — that one affects your LCP score
If the collection grows past a couple hundred photos, add pagination or "load more" so you're not shipping the entire album's DOM/JSON on first load

This is also a nice place to bring some of your paras/ui tactile-interaction philosophy in — a subtle press/glow on grid tiles and a smooth lightbox open transition would feel very at home next to your Obsidian/Velocity work, without needing a different design language for this page.

5. Making the photos actually indexable

Your homepage already has solid fundamentals (max-image-preview:large, OG tags, canonical URLs) — extend the same pattern to this page:

Page-level metadata via Next's Metadata API: title, description, canonical, OG image (pick one strong representative shot)
JSON-LD structured data — an ImageGallery/ImageObject schema block listing each photo's URL, name, and description. This is the single highest-leverage thing for Google Images indexing
Descriptive alt text and filenames for every photo — Google weighs filenames as a ranking signal, so himalayan-sunrise-uttarakhand.jpg beats IMG_4021.jpg
Image sitemap — Next's sitemap.ts route supports an images array per URL entry (the standard image-sitemap extension), so add one covering all your photo URLs
Consider individual photo pages (/photos/[slug]), statically generated via generateStaticParams, each with its own metadata and OG card. This is genuinely the biggest lever if you want individual photos to rank and be shareable on their own — Google favors a page where an image is the clear primary subject. It's more work than a single gallery page though, so I'd treat it as a phase-two addition once the gallery itself is live, not a blocker to shipping.